Marcel and the Mona Lisa by Stephen Rabley
Marcel is a French mouse and a detective. He has lots of friends in Paris.
One of them is Céline. She paints pictures
and is very beautiful. Céline's home
is at the Louvre. Marcel often goes there for dinner.
One evening in May he arrives with some pink flowers.
There is a guard at the door. I don't know him.
Marcel thinks he must be new.
Then he walks inside. The two friends
eat, drink and talk all evening. Céline shows Marcel her new paintings.
They talk about their summer holidays in Los Angeles.
They laugh, play jazz records
and tell lots of stories. Then
at eleven o'clock Marcel puts on his coat.
It's late, he says. I must go home.
Two minutes later he leaves.
Well good night, Céline, then she closes her front door.
Marcel walks across the floor.
He's very happy. Then he stops.
The room is dark but he can see
something. What is it? A man?
A man with a long knife?
Yes! Suddenly
Marcel's mouth is very dry. He runs to the wall.
Then after five seconds he looks again.
This time he can see the man's face.
It's that new guard, he thinks.
And he's stealing the man.
Next to the thief there is a black bag.
Two minutes later the Mona Lisa is inside it.
The thief smiles and picks up the bag.
But a second later he puts it down again.
Carkey!
He says and begins to look in all his pockets.
All right.
This is it, Marcel thinks.
It is now or never.
He runs along the wall very fast,
climbs up the tall black bag and jumps inside it.
At the bottom of the bag, Marcel can see a face.
The Mona Lisa's face.
She's smiling at him.
Now what? He asks her.
There is no answer, but at that moment
the bag starts to move.
Marcel can hear lots of noises.
A motor starts.
Traffic goes by.
A radio plays.
Then the bag suddenly stops.
Marcel climbs the painting and looks out.
El West de Champs.
Five minutes later the Louvre Guard gets on the train.
He sits next to a thin man in sunglasses and a white jacket.
Have you got it, Antoine?
The thin man asks, the guard answers.
After that the train starts and there is a lot of noise.
Oh no.
Now I can't hear them, Marcel thinks.
But he can hear one or two words.
Italy, for example, and all those cats.
Cats.
Marcel looks at the Mona Lisa.
His eyes are two big saucers.
But cats can kill mice.
He thinks.
They eat them.
And what are we going?
Where are we going in Italy?
Rome.
Milano Napoli.
But at that moment, Antoine puts the bag under the seat.
Now I really can't hear, Marcel thinks.
Then he goes to sleep and has a very bad dream.
Early next morning the sun is shining.
Marcel opens his eyes and sees the Mona Lisa.
Then he remembers where he is.
He runs up the painting and looks at Antoine and Auri.
Good.
He thinks, they are asleep.
Ten seconds later, Marcel is standing at the window.
He can see a small village and some mountains.
Then a sign goes by 180 kilometers to Venice.
Two hours later, Antoine and Auri are on a gondola.
Look, says Antoine, and laughs.
He shows Auri a newspaper story.
It says thieves take Da Vinci painting.
Auri says be quiet.
It turns to the boatmen.
Do you see that big palace on the left?
Signor Spandini's house.
Yes, stop there.
Inside the bag, Marcel hears every word.
An old woman answers the front door.
Come in, she says, to the two thieves.
Signor Spandini is waiting for you.
She takes them to a big dark room.
A fat man is sitting behind a desk.
A desk.
However you got it, he asks.
Yes, boss.
Henry answers.
The bag is beside him.
I cannot stay here, Marcel thinks.
He jumps out of the bag and hides behind a chair.
Good, he thinks.
Now I can, but then he goes cold.
Oh, cats.
There are seven, eight.
No, nine of them in the room.
Suddenly, Marcel remembers Auri's words.
Oh, those cats.
Then he remembers his dream on the train.
What can he do?
Where can he go?
But it's too late.
One of the cats sees him.
Help!
Marcel thinks and climbs up the red curtain.
A moment later, the cats start climbing too.
Marcel can hear it below him.
He has to do something and fast.
But what?
Then he sees two candles above his head.
That's the answer, he thinks.
He jumps onto the bookcase and starts
to push the candles over.
They're heavy, but in the end, he
does it.
Below him, he hears, yow, yow, yow.
What is all that noise?
As sent one.
Look, the carpet's on fire.
Says Auri.
Spandini stands up.
Angelina, a quick, bring some water.
Marcel looks over the bookcase.
He can see the Mona Lisa on Spandini's desk.
OK, he thinks.
This is it.
After that, he runs down the curtain.
Across Spandini's desk, picks up the Mona Lisa
and runs out of the room.
Marcel runs for a long time.
He thinks, I want to leave the Mona Lisa somewhere safe,
but where?
Then, after 20 minutes, he stops in a quiet street.
In front of him, there is a police station.
The front door has a letterbox.
Of course, Marcel thinks, that's it.
He stands up tall, then he pushes the Mona Lisa
through the letterbox.
Two days later, Marcel is in Paris again.
At the station, he sees a newspaper.
It says, Italian police, find the Mona Lisa.
Then, he goes to the Louvre and tells Silly and everything.
Oh, nine cats.
She says, oh, Marcel, are you all right?
Yes, I am fine, Marcel answers.
He goes to Celine's window.
And the Mona Lisa is fine too.
Look, Celine, she's smiling.